Hi, here's your problem today. This problem was recently asked by Amazon:

Given a string that may represent a number, determine if it is a number. Here's some of examples of how the number may be presented:
"123" # Integer
"12.3" # Floating point
"-123" # Negative numbers
"-.3" # Negative floating point
"1.5e5" # Scientific notation
Here's some examples of what isn't a proper number:
"12a" # No letters
"1 2" # No space between numbers
"1e1.2" # Exponent can only be an integer (positive or negative or 0)
Scientific notation requires the first number to be less than 10, however to simplify the solution assume the first number can be greater than 10. Do not parse the string with int() or any other python functions.

Here's some starting code:

def parse_number(s):
   # Fill this in.
   
print(parse_number("12.3"))
# True

print(parse_number("12a"))
# False


And here's the solution:
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
A good way to come up with a heuristic to parse is to use a finite state machine.

How this would work is to figure out some of the possible states, which will be listed as following.
class DigitState(Enum):
	BEGIN = 0      # Beginning state
	NEGATIVE1 = 1  # First negative character representing a negative number
	DIGIT1 = 2     # First group of digits representing the integer value
	DOT = 3        # Dot character for decimal point
	DIGIT2 = 4     # Second group of digits representing the numbers after the decimal point
	E = 5          # E to represent exponent
	NEGATIVE2 = 6  # Second negative character to represent a negative exponent
	DIGIT3 = 7     # Third group of digits representing the exponent

With this we've defined our possible states, and now we just need to define the possible transitions:

fsm = {
	DigitState.BEGIN: [DigitState.NEGATIVE1, DigitState.DIGIT1],           # Only start from NEGATIVE1 or DIGIT1
	DigitState.NEGATIVE1: [DigitState.DIGIT1, DigitState.DOT],             # NEGATIVE1 can only go to DOT or DIGIT1
	DigitState.DIGIT1: [DigitState.DIGIT1, DigitState.DOT, DigitState.E],  # DIGIT1 can go back to itself or move to DOT or E
	DigitState.DOT: [DigitState.DIGIT2],                                   # DOT can only move to DIGIT2
	DigitState.DIGIT2: [DigitState.DIGIT2, DigitState.E],                  # DIGIT2 can go back to itself or move to E
	DigitState.E: [DigitState.DIGIT3, DigitState.NEGATIVE2],               # E can go to DIGIT3 or NEGATIVE2
	DigitState.NEGATIVE2: [DigitState.DIGIT3],                             # NEGATIVE2 can only go to DIGIT3
	DigitState.DIGIT3: [DigitState.DIGIT3]                                 # DIGIT3 can only go back to itself
}

With our finite state machine defined, we already have all of the parts for a finite state machine, and just need to implement a very simple version of it. Simply iterate through all characters, and check which next state can we go to. If there are no possible states, then return False.

We also need to define possible end states, and for this problem its all the DIGIT states since we cannot end on a decimal point, exponent sign, or a negative sign. With this we have our solution.

from enum import Enum

class DigitState(Enum):
  BEGIN = 0
  NEGATIVE1 = 1
  DIGIT1 = 2
  DOT = 3
  DIGIT2 = 4
  E = 5
  NEGATIVE2 = 6
  DIGIT3 = 7

digit_lambdas = {
    DigitState.BEGIN: lambda x: True,
    DigitState.NEGATIVE1: lambda x: x == '-',
    DigitState.DIGIT1: lambda x: x.isdigit(),
    DigitState.DOT: lambda x: x == '.',
    DigitState.DIGIT2: lambda x: x.isdigit(),
    DigitState.E: lambda x: x == 'e',
    DigitState.NEGATIVE2: lambda x: x == '-',
    DigitState.DIGIT3: lambda x: x.isdigit()
}

fsm = {
    DigitState.BEGIN: [DigitState.NEGATIVE1, DigitState.DIGIT1],
    DigitState.NEGATIVE1: [DigitState.DIGIT1, DigitState.DOT],
    DigitState.DIGIT1: [DigitState.DIGIT1, DigitState.DOT, DigitState.E],
    DigitState.DOT: [DigitState.DIGIT2],
    DigitState.DIGIT2: [DigitState.DIGIT2, DigitState.E],
    DigitState.E: [DigitState.DIGIT3, DigitState.NEGATIVE2],
    DigitState.NEGATIVE2: [DigitState.DIGIT3],
    DigitState.DIGIT3: [DigitState.DIGIT3]
}


def parse_number(s):
  state = DigitState.BEGIN

  for ch in s:
    found_next_state = False
    for next_state in fsm[state]:
      if digit_lambdas[next_state](ch):
        state = next_state
        found_next_state = True
        break

    if not found_next_state:
      return False

  return state in (DigitState.DIGIT1, DigitState.DIGIT2, DigitState.DIGIT3)


print(parse_number("12.3"))
# True

print(parse_number("12a"))
# False

The time complexity is O(n) and the space complexity is O(1).

By the way, check out our NEW project CoderPro (http://coderpro.com) for over 70+ video coding sessions with ex-Google/ex-Facebook engineers.
Ready to fast-track your career? Join our premiere tech interview training program techinterviewpro.com.

Have a great day!
